So when do you want to use a custom hook instead of just creating another component?
Yeah, it's a good question. My first answer to your question is there are divided opinions on the matter.
So there's not a right answer here. The extreme side of one of it is there are some people that I know that will say,
never put an effect in your component, ever, period, end of sentence,
and that any effect should always go on a custom hook.
That's one side of it. There's an amount of validity to it because then the nice thing about custom hooks is they become easy to test in isolation,
as opposed to like a part of a great component. You can test just that the hook is working. That can be nice, right?
The other side of people's like, never write any custom hooks, always put it in the component.
I think there's less validity to that. I'm probably mostly to the side of most effects should probably end up in custom hooks
if they're shared at all or need to be tested, which usually one of those is true, right?
Yeah. So the nice thing about this hook, during the testing section, we will actually write tests for this hook, so you'll actually see how to test hooks.
We can test that it's calling the API, it's using the right parameters, it does the right thing when there's nothing there,
it does the right thing when there is something there. It becomes very, very straightforward and very easy to test.
And then now if I had like a, let's say I was writing like the admin dashboard for this,
and I needed to fetch the pizza of the day so I could show like, you know, stats for how many pizzas of the days that we were able to push,
I could just use this hook over again, right? Yeah. And this just immediately gives it back to me. I don't have to rewrite the logic again.
So hopefully that kind of bounds the box of where your opinion should lie, right? Somewhere in there.
In this specific case where we only are using pizza of the day in this very one place, I'm going to put in the component,
because this is not an interesting enough custom hook for me to try and encapsulate it or test it to all hell and back, right?
I'm sure you've all heard of dry code, right? Do not repeat yourself. I'm a wet code person.
Write everything thrice. The third time I go to write, like copy a piece of logic, I'm like, okay, maybe I should put this into a module and reuse it, right?
First time, absolutely not. Second time might be a fluke. Third time, it probably is like app code that I need to test.
There's kind of my methodology, but up to you.
Let's say that the network call takes a long time to respond. Will this cause a delay in the rendering from the custom hook,
or will it return undefined first and then when it has a value, return the updated value?
Good question. Let's walk through it. Pizza of the day. After we're done with this section, I'm never saying pizza of the day ever again,
for the record, until we get to the testing section and then I'm right back on the pony.
I have this function here, which calls this. This is not await or anything like that. This is just directly calling the function.
This is not awaiting. This is sync. This is going to call this. It's going to go into here, and it's going to set this to be null, right?
It's then going to schedule an effect to be run. Keep in mind, renders finish first before their effects happen.
Your first render is always going to be done by the time the effect is actually run.
This effect, this function here, is scheduled to run, but does not run yet. What gets returned on the first render?
Null. That's the default value. This is pizza of the day for the first render before this effect has been run.
This return here is going to be null, which means here is null. What happens when we hit this block with null?
It's going to just return loading. It returns, right? This is an early return pattern, right?
And so none of this gets run. It just returns this in short circuits here.
Now the effect runs. We get back from the API. The set gets called. This gets rendered again.
This is now actually an object that came back from the API. Is it null? No.
So all of this is going to get rendered.
So, I mean, let's just super draw this out into being agonizing. I'll wait for 10 seconds.
Alright, so yeah, I got it copilot.
See this very small loading down here? I am very talented with loading spinners, as you can see.
But nothing is being rendered down there, and then eventually it shows up.
Did you use a lowercase u in the file name of the custom hook because it's a naming convention?
Yeah, so like use pizza of the day here. Yeah, let's talk about the name kind of in general.
It's a lowercase u because it's not a component, right? What is this returning?
This returns a hook, which is not renderable by and of itself in React.
It's part of a composable part of what a component can use to get data.
So maybe say that differently. Only components have the convention of being named in uppercase.
And just to be super clear, the file names really don't matter.
You will see people call this like pizza.jsx like this.
Because like Linux file systems are insensitive and most of our stuff is always running on Linux, right?
So you can run into issues actually by uppercasing things that did happen to me at Netflix one time.
That usually doesn't matter. Usually don't have to care.
Usually the convention of putting uppercase here is useful for me at a glance to say like this is a component and exports a component.
So another way of stating this is this is not a component and anything that's not a component, I always just lowercase name.
It's really only components that get the uppercase.
And then we did talk about earlier that it is important for the name of the thing.
So looking at order here, that pizza does need to be uppercase P for that.
Now, the next thing to say is use.
Hooks have use in front of it. That is a convention.
It's not necessarily going to break React, but if you use use in your name,
then all of the React linting will catch errors that you would do with potentially with a hook, right?
So we haven't put it in here. In fact, I don't even know if I do it in here.
If we go into pizza the day here and if I say like something like if true or something like that, is this going to catch this?
It does. Look at that. No, never mind. It doesn't.
If I had the React hooks ES lint rules in here, it would catch this because even though pizza of the day is not its own type of hook,
it knows it's like this begins with use and therefore I know that this cannot be inside of an if statement.
Beyond that, it's just very easy to see at a glance.
Use pizza of the day, very obvious that this is a custom hook, right?
So while you don't have to, as your future coworker, you do have to.